Dow Tate

Chester Dow Tate, 1997 Dow Jones Newspaper Fund National Journalism Teacher of the Year and Texas' Max Haddick Teacher of the Year, has advised Shawnee Mission East High School's student publications since August 2002. Shawnee Mission East, located in the Shawnee Mission School District, is in Prairie Village, Kansas. "The Harbinger" is the school's newspaper and "The Hauberk" is the yearbook. He is also co-author of "Scholastic Journalism", a journalism textbook in its 10th edition. He also occasionally writes for magazines and yearbook companies. He runs the Gloria Shields Publications Workshop each summer in Dallas, Texas. In 2006, the workshop offered 21 different courses for writers, designers, photographers and graphics students for both yearbook and newspaper.
He recently launched his own website for the textbook at www.scholasticjournalismonline.com [http://www.scholasticjournalismonline.com] 
With the Harbinger and the Hauberk.
"The Harbinger," previously an unknown newspaper, started winning multiple awards after two years of Dow Tate's advisorship, most notably a Pacemaker Finalist nomination.
Under editor-in-chief Alex Abnos, the 2003-2004 "Harbinger" also placed 4th overall at the National Scholastic Press Association convention in Washington, D.C.
2004-2005 "Harbinger" editor in chief Libby Nelson was named the 2005 National High School Journalist of the Year, the first student from Kansas ever to receive the honor. Under her leadership, the paper won both a Pacemaker and a Gold Crown award, considered the two most prestigious awards for high school journalism.
The 2005-2006 "Harbinger" under editor-in-chief Annie Fuhrman was honored with a second Pacemaker at the November 2006 JEA/NSPA convention in Nashville and a second Gold Crown in the spring of 2007.
In April 2007, Amanda Allison, the 2006-2007 editor-in-chief, was named the National High School Journalist of the Year. Only one other high school nationally has had two students win the honor.
Under the leadership of 2007-2008 editor Laura Nelson, the "Harbinger" won a third Pacemaker award and a third Gold Crown award in four years. The staff also won back-to-back 1st place NSPA Best of Show awards in Philadelphia, Penn. and Anaheim, Calif.
Under the editorship of Stephen Nichols, the "Harbinger" took second place in the Best of Show competition in St. Louis, Mo., sixth place for 17+ pages and fifth place for newspaper special editions in Phoenix, Ariz in April 2009. Nichols, Paige Cornwell and Bernadette Myers placed first, second and third, respectively, in the 2009 Kansas Journalist of the Year Competition. The "Harbinger" recently won a fourth Pacemaker at the NSPA conference in Washington, D.C.
Led by Co-Editors-in-Chief Phoebe Unterman and Tim Shedor the "Harbinger" took sixth place in the Best of Show competition in Washington, D.C. in the 17+ pages newspaper category, and seventh place in the Best of Show Competition in the special edition category. At the NSPA's spring convention, the newspaper was award first place Best of Show in the 17+ pages category and fourth place in the special edition category. Later that school year, the "Harbinger" took first place in the Best of Show competition in Portland, OR in the 17+ pages newspaper category. Shedor and Unterman were also highly ranked in the Kansas Journalist of the Year competition as they placed first and third respectively, with Shedor going on to win runner-up at the national level.
In 2010 led by Co-Editors-in-Chief Andrew Goble and Annie Sgroi the "Harbinger" took first place in the Best of Show competition in Kansas City, Missouri in the 17+ pages newspaper category.
The "Harbinger Online" launched a re-designed website in Winter of 2009—available at www.smeharbinger.net [http://www.smeharbinger.net]. www.smeharbinger.net recently was honored as a National Pacemaker Winner in 2010, 2011 and 2012. The Harbinger Online offers stories from all of the paper's sections, includes interactive polls, live blogging from sports events, a Homegrown section of student art, Soundslides and various multimedia, an interactive calendar and section, video stories, digital PDFs from the most recent issues as well as issues since 2003, and breaking news stories. The most notable recent addition has been the live broadcasting of school events on the website. After not placing in the top 10 during the 2009 fall convention, the website placed second in the 2010 spring convention, only 5 months after its relaunch. Under the leadership of Co-Online-Editors-in-Chief Logan Heley and Patrick McGannon and Assistant Editor Maggie Simmons, the website placed first in the Best of Show competition at the 2010 Kansas City convention as well as the 2011 Anaheim convention. The website also won a Gold Crown, Pacemaker and recognition from the Weekly Reader as one of the top sites in the nation.
In 2011 Co-Editors-in-Chief Jeff Cole and Duncan MacLachlan and Assistant Editor Becca Brownlee redesigned the website once again, and launched Harbinger Radio, a 24/7 live stream on the site featuring podcasts as well as stories featured on the site and in the paper. This year also featured an unbelievable amount of growth in the Sports Department as well as improving the quality of Live Broadcasts, Adam Lowe and Patrick Frazell lead the charge in the Sports Department. Harbinger Online took first place in the Best of Show competition in Minneapolis, Minn. for the third time straight, and were also recognized as Pacemaker finalists. The Columbia Scholastic Press Association awarded the publication a Gold Crown in the spring of 2012. The website took home first place in the web design category at the spring Kansas Students Technology Leadership competition. 
"The Hauberk" had been nationally recognized before under Donna Skates, an adviser in the mid-90s. But since Tate's arrival in 2003, "The Hauberk" also shot back into the national circuit with Pacemaker and Interactive Yearbook Pacemaker nominations for successive years. In the spring of 2006, the Kansas Scholastic Press Association named "The Hauberk"'s 2005-2006 assistant editor, Allison Quick, the Kansas High School Journalist of the Year.
Year by Year.
Each year, students from both publications consistently place in the National Scholastic Press Association's Design, Story or Photo of the Year contests, as well as the Columbia Scholastic Press Association's Gold Circle Awards. The paper, the yearbook and their staffs win numerous national, regional and state-wide awards for writing, design and photography.

