Jeewanu

Jeewanu (the "particles of life") are synthetic chemical particles that possess cell-like structural and functional properties; that is, they are primitive cells, or protocells, the simplest life forms. It was first synthesised by an Indian chemist Krishna Bahadur and his team in 1963. Using photochemical reaction, they produced cell-like spherules (microscopic spherical structures) from a mixture of organic and inorganic compounds. Bahadur named these particles Jeewanu because they exhibited the basic properties of a cell, such as the presence of semipermeable membrane, amino acids, phospholipids and carbohydrates. Further, like living cells, they had several catalytic activities.
Jeewanu are cited as models for spontaneous formation (abiogenesis) of living cells for the origin of life.
Synthesis.
In 1958 Bahadur and co-workers reported in "Nature" a successful synthesis of amino acids from a mixture of paraformaldehyde, colloidal molybdenum oxide or potassium nitrate and ferric chloride under the sunlight. Based on similar procedure, Bahadur first reported the synthesis of Jeewanu in 1963 in an obscure Indian journal, "Vijnana Parishad Anusandhan Patrika". However, his detailed syntheses were published internationally in 1964 in a series of articles. Their initial experiment consisted of a sterilised apparatus in which inorganic nitrogenous compounds (such as ammonium phosphate and ammonium molybdate) and organic compounds (such as citric acid and formaldehyde) were mixed with minerals commonly found in living cells. When the apparatus was exposed under sunlight and constantly shaken, spherical microscopic particles were formed. The interesting features of these particles were that they were enclosed in a semipermeable membrane, like the typical cell membrane. Like living cells, they contained amino acids, phospholipids and carbohydrates. In addition they were demonstrated to have reproductive capability by budding, much like unicellular organisms. They had their own catalytic reactions and produced their own peptides by metabolic reactions. Their later works detected the presence of amino acids in peptide forms, nucleic acid bases including purines as well as pyrimidines, sugars such as ribose as well as deoxyribose, ferredoxin-like material, enzyme-like compound, phosphatase, ATPase, esterase, and nitrogenase.
Etymology.
Jeewanu is derived from Sanskrit "jeewa", meaning "life", and "aNu", meaning the "smallest part of something", or the "indivisible". In contemporary Hindi, "jeewanu" also means unicellular organisms such as
bacteria. Bahadur specifically used the term to represent the Indian philosophical tradition not only through the use of Sanskrit but also by inferring ideas on the origin of life from the Vedas. Bahadur, while employing the traditional Hindu philosophy, attempted to incorporate the advances in cell biology.

