Josh Bolt

Josh Bolt (born Joshua Ryan Bolt on 2 May 1994) is an English actor from Liverpool, England. He played "Robbie" in the multi award winning feature film "The Be All and End All", a role which saw him shortlisted for the best newcomer at the 2009 British Indepependent Film Awards. Josh began acting at the age of 12 when he was cast in a theatre production of "Much Ado About Nothing". In 2009 he starred alongside Aaron Johnson and Kristin Scott Thomas playing "Pete Shotton" in the BAFTA nominated film "Nowhere Boy".
He went on to appear in the ninth series of "Shameless", playing the pot smoking psychopath "Frasier Kane".
He is featured in a music video for the British Indy punk band The Targets, appearing in the video for their single "Mutual Feelings".
In summer 2011, it was announced that Bolt had won the lead role of "Henry" in ITV1's "Just Henry", which aired over the Christmas period of that same year.
Upon completing "Just Henry", Josh joined John Bishop, Robert Sheehan and Sheridan Smith in the second series of the award winning "Accused".
In January 2012, he began work on the six part BBC series "Last Tango in Halifax" (2012), playing the grandson of Derek Jacobi.
He guest starred in the final two episodes of the detective series "Lewis" opposite Edward Fox and Alison Steadman.
In July 2012, IMDB named Josh as one of their rising British teenage stars.
Bolt played Brian Harris, a central character, in the two part BBC Three drama "The Crash" which centres around a car crash inspired by real life events.
He portrayed Daniel in the third series of "Scott & Bailey"
In February 2013 Josh began work on "The Heart of Nowhere" a film directed by Charlie Fink to coincide with Noah and the Whale's new album; he will play Floyd the bass player of the group alongside Bill Milner and Toby Regbo.
At the 2013 BAFTA television awards "Last Tango in Halifax" won best drama and filming began in June 2013 of its second series it is confirmed josh will reprise his role as Raff.

