Luka and the Fire of Life

Luka and the Fire of Life is a novel by Salman Rushdie. It was published by Jonathan Cape, Random House in 2010. It is the sequel to "Haroun and the Sea of Stories". Rushdie has said "he turned to the world of video games for inspiration" and that "he wrote the book for his 13-year-old son".
Synopsis.
The book opens with protagonist Luka and his father Rashid walking home from Luka's school in the fictional city of Kahani in the land of Alifbay. They pass the Great Rings of Fire circus, where upon seeing the pitiful state of the animals Luka yells, “May your animals stop obeying your commands and your rings of fire eat up your stupid tent.” (Rushdie 6) Later that very day the animals revolt and the rings of fire consume the tents; and Dog and Bear, a bear and a dog respectively, two animals from the circus, become Luka's faithful pets, “so fierce in his defense that nobody would ever have dreamed of bullying him when they were nearby,” (Rushdie 4) One month afterwards Rashid enters a coma, attributed to a curse placed by antagonist 'Captain Aag'. Thereafter Luka travels the 'World of Magic' imagined by his father, guided by a phantom-like creature nicknamed 'Nobodaddy', representing Rashid's imminent death. Bear is identified as Barak of the it-Barak (a set of immortal dog-men), turned into a dog by a Chinese curse; and Dog as the monarch of a northern land turned into animals by an ogre. All four seek the eponymous 'Fire of Life' to revive Rashid. At the River of Time, which they must follow to find the Fire, they are attacked by the Old Man of the River, who kills Luka. After being revived, Luka realises that this world will revive him continually until he achieves his purpose, or exceeds his chances of doing so. Luka eventually bests the Old Man in a game of riddles. The protagonists then find a boat but are soon capsized and thereafter carried upriver by the Elephant Ducks, “a pair of absurd creatures with duck-like bodies and large elephant heads,” (Rushdie 66).
Later the group stops at the Respectorate of I, a city ruled by rats insisting on cultural relativism. In leaving this city, Luka accidentally insults the Respectorate's national song; but is rescued by the Insultana of Ott, “a green-eyed girl wearing a green and gold cloak, her fiery red hair streaming in the wind, nor more than sixteen or seventeen years old” (Rushdie 78), whom Luka identifies by his mother's name of Soraya. Accompanied by her, Luka and his companions ride her flying carpet through the Mists of Time and the Great Stagnation. The elephant birds help through the Trillion and One Forking Paths, where the true River of Time is disguised among duplicates. Afterwards, they are temporarily detained by the Great Rings of Fire, which Dog and Bear identify as the handiwork of Captain Aag. When Bear and Dog disable this, Aag appears beside Nuthog, a shape-changer in the form of a dragon; but the latter betrays Aag when Soraya frees Nuthog's three sisters. Accompanied by these, the protagonist elude the gods of various mythologies to obtain the Fire of Life. Trickster-spirit 'Coyote' thereafter distracts the gods while Luka captures the Fire of Life and later persuades the gods to permit his possession thereof. Returning to the human world, they are joined by Prometheus, who assists them past the Mists of Time. They are then captured in the cloud fortress of Baddal-Garh, now under the control of the antagonist 'Aalim' and Nobodaddy, who has betrayed Luka to complete his task of killing Rashid. Prometheus then hurls Nobodaddy into outer space. When the Aalim cause everyone but Luka, Dog, Bear, and Prometheus to collapse in pain, Luka curses the Aalim and the gods destroy the fortress. Luka and his companions continue toward Rashid, the gods defending them from the deadly 'Rain Cats'. Luka revives Rashid, and Bear destroys himself and Nobodaddy arrives. The story concludes with the Fire's concealment by Luka's mother, after a celebration by the family.
Reception.
Although intended for young adult readers, Rushdie's novel, according to the "School Library Journal", "appeals to all ages". The "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" criticised the book, calling it "a hodgepodge of what Mr. Rushdie hopes are clever references to mythology, folklore and popular culture" and adding that it is an "assembly-line story welded together from parts of this and that".
The novel inspired a university animation competition in 2010. "Design Week" explained: "Sir Salman Rushdie’s new children’s novel, "Luka and the Fire of Life", will be brought to life through the animations of four Kingston University students. Rushdie was part of a judging panel which invited ten students from the faculty of art, design and architecture to present ideas for the book." The successful animations were to appear on YouTube and the Random House website.
Bibliography.
Rushdie, Salman. "Luka and the Fire of Life." New York: Random House, 2010. Print.

