Romanian alphabet

The Romanian alphabet is a modification of the classical Latin alphabet and consists of 31 letters:
The letters Q (read "kü" or "chiu"), W ("dublu ve"), and Y ("igrec" or "i grec") were officially introduced in the Romanian alphabet in 1982, although they had been used earlier. They occur only in foreign words and their Romanian derivatives, such as "quasar", "watt", and "yacht". The letter "K", although relatively older, is also rarely used and appears only in proper names and international neologisms such as "kilogram", "broker", "karate". These four letters are still perceived as foreign, which explains their use for stylistic purposes in words such as "nomenklatură" (normally "nomenclatură", meaning "nomenclature", but sometimes spelled with a "k" to mean the members of the Communist leadership in the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc countries, as "Nomenklatura" is used in English).
In cases where the word is a direct borrowing having diacritical marks not present in the above alphabet, official spelling tends to favor their use ("München", "Angoulême" etc., as opposed to the use of "Istanbul" over "İstanbul").
Letters and their pronunciation.
Romanian spelling is mostly phonemic. The table below gives the correspondence between letters and sounds. Some of the letters have several possible readings, even if allophones are not taken into account. When vowels , , , and are changed into their corresponding semivowels, this is not marked in writing. Letters K, Q, W, and Y appear only in foreign borrowings; the pronunciation of W and Y depends on the origin of the word they appear in.
Special letters.
Romanian does not use accents. In the sense of diacritics as being signs added to letters to alter their pronunciation or to make distinction between words, the Romanian alphabet does not have diacritics. There are, however, five special letters in the Romanian alphabet (associated with four different sounds), formed by modifying other Latin letters; strictly speaking they are not diacritics, but are generally referred to as such.
The letter "â" is used exclusively in the middle of words; its majuscule version appears only in all-capitals inscriptions.
Writing letters and with a cedilla instead of a comma is considered incorrect by the Romanian Academy. Romanian writings, including books created to teach children to write, treat the comma and cedilla as a variation in font. See Unicode and HTML below.
Î versus Â.
The letters "î" and "â" are phonetically and functionally identical. The reason for using both of them is historical, denoting the language's Latin origin.
For a few decades until a spelling reform in 1904, as many as four or five letters had been used for the same phoneme ("â", "ê", "î", "û", and occasionally "ô"), according to an etymological rule. The 1904 reform saw only two letters remaining, "â" and "î", the choice of which followed rules that changed several times during the 20th century.
During the first half of the century the rule was to use "î" in word-initial and word-final positions, and "â" everywhere else. There were exceptions, imposing the use of "î" in internal positions when words were combined or derived with prefixes or suffixes. For example the adjective "urît" "ugly" was written with "î" because it derives from the verb "a urî" "to hate".
In 1953, during the Communist regime, the Romanian Academy eliminated the letter "â", replacing it with "î" everywhere, including the name of the country, which was to be spelled "Romînia". The first stipulation coincided with the official designation of the country as a People's Republic, which meant that its full title was "Republica Populară Romînă". A minor spelling reform in 1964 brought back the letter "â", but only in the spelling of "român" "Romanian" and all its derivatives, including the name of the country. As such, the Socialist Republic proclaimed in 1965 is associated with the spelling "Republica Socialistă România".
Soon after the fall of the Ceaușescu regime, the Romanian Academy decided to reintroduce "â" from 1993 onward, by canceling the effects of the 1953 spelling reform and essentially reverting to the 1904 rules (with some differences). The move was publicly justified as the rectification either of a totalitarian assault of the Communist regime on tradition, or of a Soviet influence on the Romanian culture, and as a return to a traditional spelling that bears the mark of the language's Latin origin. The political context at the time, however, was that the Romanian Academy was largely regarded as a Communist and corrupt institution — Nicolae Ceaușescu and his wife Elena had been its honored members, and membership had been controlled by the Communist Party. As such, the 1993 spelling reform was seen as an attempt of the Academy to break with its Communist past. The Academy invited the national community of linguists as well as the foreign linguists specialized in Romanian to discuss the problem; when they overwhelmingly opposed the spelling reform in vehement terms, their position was explicitly dismissed as being too scientific.
According to the 1993 reform, the choice between "î" and "â" is thus again based on a rule that is neither strictly etymological nor phonological, but positional and morphological. The sound is always spelled as "â", except at the beginning and the end of words, where "î" is to be used instead. Exceptions include proper nouns where the usage of the letters is frozen, whichever it may be, and compound words, whose components are each separately subjected to the rule (e.g. "ne-" + "îndemânatic" → "neîndemânatic" "clumsy", not *"neândemânatic"). However, the exception no longer applies to words derived with suffixes, in contrast with the 1904 norm; for instance what was spelled "urît" after 1904 became "urât" after 1993. The 1st singular and the 3rd plural of the verb "a fi" "to be", now spelled "sunt", make up an exception based on Latin etymology.
Although the reform was promoted as a means to show the Latin origin of Romanian, statistically only few of the words written with "â" according to the 1993 reform actually derive from Latin words having an "a" in the corresponding position. Moreover, there are words that used to be closer in spelling to their Latin etymon before the 1993 reform than after; for example "rîu" "river", from the Latin "rivus", became "râu"; the same is true for "rîde" < "ridere", "sîn" < "sinus", "strînge" < "stringere", "lumînare" < "luminaria", etc.
While the 1993 spelling norm is compulsory in the Romanian education and official publications, and gradually most other publications came to use it, there are still individuals, publications and publishing houses preferring the previous spelling norm or a mixed hybrid system of their own. Among them is the weekly cultural magazine "Dilema Veche", whereas some publications, such as "România literară", magazine of the Writers' Union of Romania, and publishing houses such as Polirom allow authors to choose either spelling norm. Dictionaries, grammars and other linguistic works have also been published using the "î" and "sînt" long after the 1993 reform.
Comma-below ( and ) versus cedilla ( and ).
Although the Romanian Academy standard mandates the comma-below variants for the sounds and , the cedilla variants are still widely used. Many printed and online texts still incorrectly use "s with cedilla" and "t with cedilla". This state of affairs is due to an initial lack of glyph standardization, compounded by the lack of computer font support for the comma-below variants (see the Unicode section for details).
The lack of support for the comma diacritics has been corrected in current versions of major operating systems: Windows Vista or newer, Linux distributions after 2005, currently supported MacOS versions. As mandated by the European Union, Microsoft released a font update to correct this deficiency in Windows XP in early 2007, soon after Romania joined the European Union.
Obsolete letters.
Before the spelling reform of 1904, there were several additional letters with diacritical marks.
Use of these letters was not fully adopted even before 1904, as some publications (e.g. "Timpul" and "Universul") chose to use a simplified approach that resembled today's Romanian language writing.
Other diacritics.
As with other languages, the acute accent is sometimes used in Romanian texts to indicate the stressed vowel in some words. This use is regular in dictionary headwords, but also occasionally found in carefully edited texts to disambiguate between homographs that are not also homophones, such as to differentiate between "cópii" ("copies") and "copíi" ("children"), "éra" ("era") and "erá" ("was"), "ácele" ("the needles") and "acéle" ("those"), etc. The accent also distinguishes between homographic verb forms, such as "încúie" and "încuié" ("he locks" and "he has locked").
Diacritics in some borrowings are kept: "bourrée", "pietà". Foreign names are also usually spelled with their original diacritics: "Bâle", "Molière", even when an acute accent might be wrongly interpreted as a stress, as in "István" or "Gérard". However, frequently used foreign names, such as names of cities or countries, are often spelled without diacritics: "Bogota", "Panama", "Peru".
Digital typography.
ISO 8859.
The character encoding standard ISO 8859 initially defined a single code page for the entire Central and Eastern Europe — ISO 8859-2. This code page includes only "s" and "t" with cedillas. The South-Eastern European ISO 8859-16 includes "s" and "t" with comma below on the same places "s" and "t" with cedilla were in ISO 8859-2. The ISO 8859-16 code page became a standard after Unicode became widespread, however, so it was largely ignored by software vendors.
Unicode and HTML.
The circumflex and breve accented Romanian letters were part of the Unicode standard since its inception, as well as the cedilla variants of s and t. and (comma-below variants) were added to Unicode version 3.0. From Unicode version 3.0 to version 5.1, the cedilla-using characters were specified by the Unicode Standard to be "used in both Turkish and Romanian data" and that "a glyph variant with comma below is preferred for Romanian"; On the newly encoded comma-using characters, it said that they should be used "when distinct comma below form is required". Unicode 5.2 explicitly states that "the form with the cedilla is preferred in Turkish, and the form with the comma below is preferred in Romanian", while mentioning (possibly for historical reasons) that "in Turkish and Romanian, a cedilla and a comma below sometimes replace one another".
Widespread adoption was hampered for some years by the lack of fonts providing the new glyphs. In May 2007, five months after Romania (and Bulgaria) joined the EU, Microsoft released updated fonts that include all official glyphs of the Romanian (and Bulgarian) alphabet. This font update targeted Windows XP SP2, Windows Server 2003, and Windows Vista. The subset of Unicode most widely supported on Microsoft Windows systems, Windows Glyph List 4, still does not include the comma-below variants of S and T.
Vowels with diacritics are coded as follows:
Adobe/Linotype/Vista de facto standard.
Adobe Systems decided that the Unicode glyphs "t with cedilla" U+0162/3 are not used in any language. Adobe has therefore substituted the glyphs with "t with comma below" (U+021A/B) in all the fonts they ship. The unfortunate consequence of this decision is that Romanian documents using the (unofficial) Unicode points U+015E/F and U+0162/3 (for ș and ț) are rendered in Adobe fonts in a visually inconsistent way using "s with cedilla", but "t with comma" (see figure). Linotype fonts that support Romanian glyphs mostly follow this convention.
The fonts introduced by Microsoft in Windows Vista also implement this de facto Adobe standard. Few Microsoft fonts provide a consistent look when cedilla variants are used; notable ones are Tahoma, Verdana, Trebuchet MS, Microsoft Sans Serif and Segoe UI.
The free DejaVu and Linux Libertine fonts provide proper and consistent glyphs in both variants. Red Hat's Liberation fonts only support the comma below variants starting with version 1.04, scheduled for inclusion in Fedora 10.
OpenType codice_1 feature.
Some OpenType fonts from Adobe and all C-series Vista fonts implement the optional OpenType feature codice_2. This feature forces "s with cedilla" to be rendered using the same glyph as "s with comma below". When this second (but optional) remapping takes place, Romanian Unicode text is rendered with comma-below glyphs regardless of code point variants.
Unfortunately, most Microsoft pre-Vista OpenType fonts (Arial etc.) do not implement the codice_1 feature, even after the European Union Expansion Font Update, so old documents will look inconsistent as in the left side of the above figure. Select few fonts, e.g. Verdana and Trebuchet MS, not only have a consistent look for cedilla variants (after the EU update), but also do a simultaneous remapping of cedilla s and t to comma-below variants when codice_1 is activated. The free DejaVu and Linux Libertine fonts do not yet offer this feature in their current releases, but development versions do.
Pango supports the codice_5 tag since version 1.17. XeTeX supports codice_5 since version 0.995. As of July 2008, very few Windows applications support the codice_5 feature tag. From the Adobe CS3 suite, only InDesign has support for it.
The status of Romanian support in the free fonts that ship with Fedora is maintained at Fedoraproject.org.
Combining characters.
Unicode also allows diacritical marks to be represented as standalone combining characters. For Romanian characters this method is practically unsupported in commercial fonts. A few free fonts like Charis SIL, DejaVu or Linux Libertine support this method, but the typographical quality varies, thus it is preferable to use the single code points instead.
(La)TeX.
LaTeX allows typesetting in Romanian using the cedilla Ş and Ţ using the Cork encoding. The comma-below variants are not completely supported in the standard 8-bit TeX font encodings. The lack of a standard LICR (LaTeX Internal Character Representations) for comma-below Ș and Ț is part of the problem. The codice_8 input method attempts to remedy the problem by defining the \textcommabelow LICR accent. This is unfortunately not supported by the codice_9 input method.
The codice_8 package composes the comma-below glyphs by superimposing a comma and the letters S and T. This method is suitable only for printing. In PDF documents produced this way searching or copying text does not work properly. The Polish QX encoding has some support for comma-below glyphs, which are improperly mapped to cedilla LICRs, but also lacks A breve (Ă), which must always be composite, thus unsearchable.
In the Latin Modern Type 1 fonts the T with comma below is found under the AGL name /Tcommaaccent. This is in contradiction with Adobe's decision discussed above, which puts a T with comma-below at /Tcedilla. In consequence, no fixed mapping can work across all Type 1 fonts; each font must come with its own mapping. Unfortunately, TeX output drivers, like dvips, dvipdfm or pdfTeX's internal PDF driver, access the glyphs by AGL name. Since all of the output drivers mentioned are unaware of this peculiarity, the problem is essentially intractable across all fonts. In consequence, one needs to use fonts that include a mapping which is not bypassed by TeX. This is the case with newer TeX engine XeTeX, which can use Unicode OpenType fonts, and does not bypass the font's Unicode map.
Phonetic alphabet.
There is a Romanian equivalent to the English-language NATO phonetic alphabet. Most code words are people's first names, with the exception of K, J, Q, W, Y, and Z. Letters with diacritics (Ă, Â, Î, , ) are generally transmitted without diacritics (A, A, I, S, T).

