Saltasaurinae

Saltasaurinae is a subfamily of titanosaurian sauropods known from the late Cretaceous period of South America, India and Madagascar. They are considered the most derived of all sauropods.
Naming.
In 1992 Powell implied the idea of Saltasaurinae when he appointed Saltasauridae. The first definition as a clade was given by Dalgado in 1997. His definition was The last common ancestor of "Neuquensaurus australis" and "Saltasaurus loricatus" and all their descendants. Paul Sereno named it in 1998, unaware of Dalgado's work and gave it a new definition as a stemclade. This definition was All of Saltasauridae more closely related to "Saltasaurus" than to "Opisthocoelicaudia". In 2003 Wilson decorated this definition to All Saltasauridae more closely related to "Saltasaurus loricatus" than to "Opisthocoelicaudia skaryzinskii".
Description.
Size.
Saltasaurines are relatively small to large herbivores (relatively small for sauropods). They range from the modest 8 metres (26 feet) of "Rocasaurus" to the relatively medium to large 15 metres (49 feet) of "Neuquensaurus". Although without any estimates, the Madagascan Saltasaurine might be proven longer than even "Neuquensaurus" if less fragmentary remains are discovered.
Armour.
Saltasaurinae is the only known group of sauropods with armour from almost every known species. The most probable reason for the bony studs and plates is that it evolved for defence against theropods like "Abelisaurus" and "Carnotaurus".The armour of Saltasaurines has led to some controversy. In 1929 Friedrich von Huene named "Loricosaurus" which, for some time had been misidentified as an ankylosaur. Currently, "Loricosaurus"' classification is under threat because it's armour is a lot like that of "Saltasaurus" and "Neuquensaurus".
Weight.
The weight of Saltasaurines is very light compared to that of some of the largest dinosaurs. They range from around 7 000-21 000 kg (15 432-46 297 lb) The heaviest Saltasaurine is the unnamed form from Madagascar at around 21 000 kg (around 46 300 lbs). The lightest definite Saltasaurine is surprisingly "Saltasaurus". The weight of the type genus is estimated at around 7 000 kg (around 15 500 lbs) by Holtz "et al" (2011).
Age.
They lived in the late Cretaceous, from the early Campanian to the Maastrichtian (about 80 - 66 million years ago) when they perished along with all other dinosaurs except for birds. "Saltasaurus" is the only named Saltasaurine that lived later in the Maastrichtian than 68 million years ago. "Loricosaurus" and "Neuquensaurus" lived around 71 million years ago and the later surviving "Jainosaurus" lived around 68 million years ago. An unnamed Saltasaurine from Madagascar would have probably survived later, until the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event, around 66 million years ago.
Distribution.
The subfamily Saltasaurinae is known almost completely from the Southern Hemisphere with South American forms ("Loricosaurus", "Neuquensaurus", "Rocasaurus" and "Saltasaurus"). "Jainosaurus" is the only definite Saltasaurine from outside the Southern Hemisphere. Apart from "Jainosaurus" the only other genus from outside of South America is the currently unnamed form from the late Cretaceous (middle to late Maastrichtian) period in the current country of Madagascar.
Relationships.
Saltasaurinae is the sister group to Opisthocoelicaudiinae which houses "Alamosaurus", probably "Borealosaurus" and "Opisthocoelicaudia". Here is the classification of Saltasauridae after Holtz "et al" (2010) including all direct parents and other families up to Titanosauria:

