Canaan Online

Canaan Online or Pet Forest Online (in the North America) is a free-to-play, browser-based massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) by XPEC Entertainment. It was first released in China in 2008, and was launched in Europe by gPotato Europe in early 2010.
Canaan requires no subscription fee to play. There is a cash shop where players can purchase certain in-game items for real money to enhance their characters and ease gameplay. As it can be played in a browser and is flash-based, the game requires no download and is playable on any operating system that supports the Flash plugin, if an internet connection is present.
Gameplay & plot.
Canaan Online takes place in a fantasy universe. Its inhabitants have fled their ancient world through a magical door known as the Sacred Gate, and arrive in a new paradise land. After many years of human strife and conflict, the people wish to return to their old land, to begin anew and rebuild their civilisation.
Players can create a character that they will play throughout the game. During character creation, the player can customise the character's appearance and name, and choose one of the five classes - Warrior, Priest, Mage, Ranger and Druid.
Throughout the game, the player encounters monsters and can explore dungeons. Due to the casual nature of the game, the players can change their character's attack option to 'Auto' and will still be able to engage in combat without having to actively control their character. The pet feature is also a large part of combat, as monsters can be trapped and trained into pets, and pets can then be used to provide offensive and defensive benefits to the player character.
Canaan players are also able to engage in social actions, such as forming or joining a guild, player versus player duels and combat, and marriage or divorce.
Development history.
Canaan Online was developed by XPEC Entertainment, and was released to the Chinese market in 2008. It was released to the European market in English, German and French, with other languages potentially following, in February 2010 and is published by Gala Networks Europe. The game is available via the gPotato.eu gaming portal.
The aim of the game is to allow players to experience an MMORPG environment without the need to download or install a game client. In China, this was generally received positively, receiving the award "Best Browser-Based MMO 2008". In February 2011, Canaan Online came third in the BBGSite.com Favourite Roleplaying Game 2010 category.

