Finance Corps

The United States Army Finance Corps is a combat service support (CSS) branch of the United States Army. The Finance Corps is the successor to the old Pay Department, which was created in June 1775. The Finance Department was created by law on 1 July 1920 It became the Finance Corps in 1950. It is responsible for financial operations, most notably payroll and contracting. It is the smallest branch of the army [http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/agency/army/finance.htm.
Finance Corps units.
Corps-level financial management formations exist in Europe, South Korea, and at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, and at Fort Hood, Texas.
The 18th Financial Management Support Center (18 FMSC) provides financial management services to the units of the Airborne Corps. It is based at Fort Bragg (North Carolina) and it's higher head quarters (HQ) is the 1st Theater Sustainment Command (1st TSC)Fort Bragg, NC. The 18th FMSC is responsible for the 24th Financial Management Company (FMCO), the 33rd FMCO, the 82nd FMCO, the 101st FMCO, and the 126th FMCO. 
The mission of the 18th Financial Management Center is:
In early 1998 the Commanding General of United States Army Forces Command approved a request from the CG, XVIII Airborne Corps to combine the 18th Finance Group and the 18th Personnel Group (Airborne); to establish a provisional 18th Soldier Support Group (18th SSG) at Ft. Hood; to form SSBs at Forts Stewart, Drum and Campbell; and, to combine the two remaining Finance Battalions at Ft. Bragg. The General Officer Steering Committee (GOSC) did not support the XVIII consolidations as proposed. This decision was made without the benefit of the TRADOC force development process which was Phase 2 of the Service to the Soldier Study. It was not a foregone conclusion that SSBs and SSGs would be implemented Army-Wide. FORSCOM and XVIII Airborne Corps were forging ahead of the Soldier Support Institute study as it was expedient to do so due to the impending force reductions.
Other higher finance formations include:

