Grimsargh

Grimsargh is a village and civil parish in the City of Preston, Lancashire, England. According to the 2001 census the parish had a population of 2,164. The parish is part of the electoral ward of Preston Rural East.
Geography.
The village lies between Preston and Longridge, and south of Goosnargh. Notable features include St. Michael's parish church (CE) and a large parkland area to the west of the village. Several large reservoirs can be found to the east and until recently these were used extensively by local anglers. The Savick Brook flows just north of the village. The village is also along the route of the Ribble Way.
Industry.
The village has one public house, The Plough, situated in the village centre. The pub has won several county-wide awards for its food and service but has since changed owners. There is also a private members social club in the village.
Grimsargh was once a stop on the now dismantled Preston to Longridge railway line. A junction and platform to the north east of the station allowed passengers to board trains to the nearby Whittingham Hospital via the private Whittingham Hospital Railway.
History.
The town formed a parish in 1875 within the area known as Brockholes, which became one part of the much larger Amounderness hundred, in which Preston was also included.
Oliver Cromwell's Roundhead army came through Grimsargh en route to what is now Walton-le-Dale in Preston, on what became known as the Battle of Preston on 17 August 1648.
The name Grimsargh is said to derive from an Old Norse name "Grímr" with Norse "erg". One reference lists it as coming from the Domesday Book's "Grimesarge", "at the temple of Grimr" (a name for Odin).
Community.
Grimsargh now contains a bowls club, cricket club and pavilion. The cricket club has 5 senior teams. 1 playing on Wednesdays in the Boddington's Village Cricket League. 3 playing on Saturdays in the Moore & Smalley Palace Shield league structue (Divion's 3,4 & 6), and also a Sunday XI playing in the Moore & Smalley Palace Shield Sunday League. Training is held on Tuesdays at the club's home ground on the village green, and the club welcomes new players of all abilities and ages. Grimsargh St. Michael's Church, St. Michael's Primary School and pre-school are all located near the village hall.
Grimsargh Village Hall is a popular and thriving venue for public activities and private events, run by the Grimsargh Village Community Association. The Hall also hosts the monthly Grimsargh Farmers' Market which is a well-established and popular market offering a wide range of local produce and crafts.
Grimsargh also has an active Parish Council, with nine Councillors and a Clerk.

