Jardwadjali

The Jardwadjali (also known as "Jadawadjali") people are Indigenous Australians who occupy the lands in the upper Wimmera River watershed east to Gariwerd (Grampians) and west to Lake Bringalbert. The towns of Horsham, Cavendish, Coleraine, Apsley, Minyip and Donald are within their territory. There were 37 Jardwadjali clans who formed an alliance with the neighboring Djab wurrung people through intermarriage, shared culture, trade and moiety system. The Jardwadjali society is matrilineal.
Language.
The Jardwadjali language shares 90 percent common vocabulary with Djab wurrung. Sub-dialects include Jagwadjali, Mardidjali, and Nundadjali.
History.
The Jardwadjali people have lived in the area for up to 30,000 to 40,000 years, certainly with evidence of occupation in Gariwerd many thousands of years before the last ice-age. One site in the Victoria Range (Billawin
Range) has been dated from 22,000 years ago.
It is likely that first contact with Europeans was through smallpox epidemics which arrived with the First Fleet in 1788 and rapidly spread through the trading networks of indigenous Australians and killed many people in two waves before the 1830s. One Wotjobaluk account called the disease "thinba micka" and that it killed large numbers of people, and disfigured many more with pock-marked faces, and came down the Murray River sent by malevolent sorcerers to the north.
Conflict and dispossession.
In 1836 the squatter Edward Henty was exploring Jardwadjali land from the south, the start of the European invasion. A further wave of European occupation occurred from the north in 1840 with Lieutenant Robert Briggs squatting near Lake Lonsdale.
The explorer Major Thomas Mitchell passed through the lands of the Jardwadjali people in 1836 and named many geographical features, including the Grampian mountains which he named after the range of mountains in Scotland. The Jardwadjali called these mountains "Gariwerd" with Gar meaning ‘pointed mountain’, i meaning ‘the’ and werd meaning ‘shoulder’.
To the Jardwadjali and Djab wurrung peoples Gariwerd was central to the dreaming of the creator, Bunjil, and "buledji Brambimbula", the two brothers Bram, who were responsible for the creation and naming of many landscape features in western Victoria.
Jardwadjali people formed the nucleus of the Australian Aboriginal cricket team in England in 1868, although efforts were made by the Central Board for the Protection of Aborigines to stop the tour. The team played 47 matches, winning 14, losing 14, and drawing 19 games. 
There were no aboriginal missions established in "Jardwadjali" territory, so by the 1860s and 1870s many Jardwadjali were forced to locate at Ebenezer Mission in Wergaia country on the Wimmera River, and at Lake Condah mission in Dhauwurd wurrung country.
Massacres.
Settlement was marked by resistance to the invasion often by driving off or stealing sheep which then resulted in conflict and sometimes a massacre of aboriginal people.
Very few of these reports were acted upon to bring the settlers to court. After the massacre at Fighting Hills, John Whyte travelled to Melbourne to inform Governor La Trobe in person of the massacre. The depositions of the Aboriginal Protector Charles Sievwright who had personally investigated the massacre were disallowed. No trial was ever held. At the time aborigines were denied the right to give evidence in courts of law. The incidents listed below are just the cases that have been reported; it is likely other incidents occurred that were never reported and not documented officially. Neil Black, a squatter in Western Victoria writing on 9 December 1839 states the prevailing attitude of many settlers:
George Robinson, the Chief Protector of Aborigines wrote in his journal in 1841 referring to the Portland Bay area where the Whyte Brothers had settled:
Table: reported massacres in Jardwadjali country to 1859 
Recent history.
In 1989 there was a proposal by Victorian Minister for Tourism, Steve Crabb to rename many geographical place names associated with aboriginal heritage in the area. There was much opposition to this proposal by European descendants. The Brambuk centre, representing five aboriginal communities, advocated a dual name for the main area: Gariwerd/Grampians.
Some of the changes included:
The "Brambuk National Park and Cultural Centre" in Halls Gap is owned and managed by Jardwadjali and Djab Wurrung people from five Aboriginal communities with historic links to the Gariwerd-Grampians ranges and the surrounding plains.
Native Title recognition.
The indigenous peoples of the Wimmera won native title recognition on 13 December 2005 after a ten year legal process. It was the first successful native title claim in south-eastern Australia and in Victoria, determined by Justice Ron Merkel involving Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, Jardwadjali, Wergaia and Jupagalk people. In his reasons for judgement Justice Merkel explained the significance of his orders:

