Jimmy Stewart (musician)

Jimmy Stewart (born September 8, 1937) is an American guitarist who has performed a wide variety of music since the late-1950s. He is best known for his association with jazz guitarist, Gabor Szabo, but has been extensively involved in many genres of music; not only as a guitarist, but also as an arranger, conductor, producer, orchestrator, musical director, and educator. Stewart has appeared on over 1,200 recordings. Leonard Feather wrote in his "Encyclopedia Of Jazz In The Seventies": “Stewart, an exceptionally experienced and able artist on all plectrum instruments, attributes his inspiration to a range of influences, from Segovia and Bartók to Charlie Christian and Laurindo Almeida."
Early life.
Stewart was born on September 8, 1937 in San Francisco, United States (US). At the age of four, Stewart commenced piano lessons, switching to the guitar when he was eight. He snuck out of the family house late at night to experience jam sessions at after-hours clubs. 
A professional at age 15, Stewart received the opportunity to play with Earl Hines when he was 16. After working in Lake Tahoe, Stewart studied at the College of San Mateo, earning an Associate Arts degree in 1957; he was married to Janet McCoy in 1958. He then studied at the Chicago School of Music in 1960, where he gained a Bachelor of Arts degree following his time as a student of renowned classical guitarist and teacher, Richard Pick; and he received a certificate in composition/modern arranging from the Berklee School of Music in 1964. (1) Stewart also engaged in private studies with Albert Harris (composition, film scoring and orchestration), Jack Lee (conducting), George M. Smith (classical and studio guitar), Paul Miller (fretted instruments), and Bud Young (dance band arrangements and harmony and composition from the 16th–18th centuries).
US Army service.
During the period from 1958 to 1960, Stewart served in the US Army, where he became a Broadcast Specialist. He recorded the 1959 Playboy Jazz Festival for the Armed Forces radio station, was the musical director/arranger for the weekly radio show, "At Ease Show", and produced "Parade Rest" for St Louis television. (4) He also played guitar on variety shows and produced other radio programs.
Move to Los Angeles.
Following his time with Szabo, Stewart moved to Los Angeles, where he became very involved in several different areas of music. He recorded his album, "The Touch", of which Jim Ferguson wrote in Guitar Player Magazine, “Throughout, Jimmy displays his imagination, depicting a fictional encounter between Szabo and Carlos Santana, as well as paying tribute to influences Jimmy Raney, Jim Hall and Wes Montgomery. Highlights include the fluid, bebop soloing on 'Jim’s Tune' and the synth-backed nylon-string work on ‘Personal Touch.’” (8) In addition to playing jazz, Stewart also sounded comfortable playing heavy metal next to Tommy Bolen at a music industry trade show in Los Angeles. (9)
Studio musician and musical director.
Since settling in Los Angeles, Stewart worked as the musical director for Lainie Kazan (arranger and conductor on tours between 1972 and 1979) and as an arranger for the road tours of Andy Williams; he also worked with Gary Crosby, Chita Rivera, and Rod McKuen. Stewart also arranged for John Gary, Lou Gottlieb, Alex Hassel, Chad Mitchell and Tonilee Scott, and coached Linda Ronstadt, Juice Newton and Lee Ritenour. (4)
As a studio musician, Stewart has played on over 1,200 sessions. (1) He was one of the first studio guitarists to introduce the sound of rock guitar to soundtracks and commercials and his versatility meant that he was in demand as a professional musician for numerous decades. (4) Chris Colombi Jr wrote of Stewart in 1986, “His playing and tastes run back to the blues, Charlie Christian and Django Reinhardt, and forward to Al DiMeola, Tony Purrone and Jim Hall.”
Film and television score appearances.
Stewart's guitar playing has been utilized in such movies as "Paint Your Wagon", "Topaz", "Some Kind Of Nut", "Nice Dreams", "Minus One", and "Chain Of Command". In television, he has appeared on the scores of "Ironside", "The Bold Ones", "Dan August", "The Burt Bacharach Special", "The Mike Douglas Show", and "The Tonight Show". (4) He also played music for stage shows, such as "How To Succeed In Business Without Really Trying", "Half A Sixpence", "110 In The Shade", "No Strings", "Funny Girl", "Here's Love", "Bye Bye Birdie", "Kiss Me Kate", "Roar Of The Greasepaint —The Smell of the Crowd", "West Side Story", "The Boy-Friend", "Little Abner", "Banbouche", and "Man Of La Mancha".
In 1991, Stewart was inducted into the Alabama Music Hall Of Fame.
Educator and author.
Stewart has written 27 books on the guitar, including "Wes Montgomery Jazz Guitar Method" (1968); "The Howard Roberts Guitar Book" (1970), co-authored with Howard Roberts); "Guitar For Songwriters" (1977); "Ear Training For Guitarists" (1977); "Sight Reading For Guitarists" (1978); "Evolution Of Jazz Guitar" (1987); "The Working Guitarist" (1989); "Heavy Metal Guitar" (1992); and "The Complete Jazz Guitarist" (1994).
Stewart was the founder of the guitar program at Dick Grove Music Workshops and was chairman of the Music Department at the Audio/Video Institute of Technology in Hollywood, US, conducting master classes in record production and music recording history. Stewart also taught guitar at the Musicians Institute of Technology; taught theory, orchestration and guitar at the University of Southern California; and helped to build the guitar department at Dick Grove Workshops. In the mid-1980s, one of Stewart's guitar students was Linda Ronstadt. (9) He wrote the monthly column, “The Complete Musician”, for "Guitar Player Magazine" during the period from 1971 to 1981 and has also written articles for the "Jazz Educators Journal", "Sound & Recording Magazine", "On Stage Magazine" and "Recording Engineer & Producer Magazine". (4)
Composer.
As a classical composer, Stewart has written more than 15 compositions, ten of which have included works such as "10 Etudes For Classical Guitar", "Concertino For Electric Guitar and Orchestra", "Folk Songs for Orchestra", "Sonata For Unaccompanied Violin", and two string quartets. (10)
Golf and hypnosis.
An enthusiastic golfer and a student of the game, Stewart wrote "Mastering Golf Through Hypnosis" in 2009 and produced a recorded the book, read by Tye Justice. Stewart studied "Hypnotherapy with John McCarthy" at the Hypnosis Motivation Institute in Los Angeles, US, and has worked with children as an assistant golf coach. He has also appeared on several golf infomercials. (4)

