Monywa

Monywa (; ) is a city in Sagaing Region, Myanmar, located 136 km northwest of Mandalay on the eastern bank of the River Chindwin.
Climate.
Monywa has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen climate classification "Aw"). Temperatures are very warm throughout the year, although the winter months (December–February) are milder. The pre-monsoon months from March to May are especially hot, with average maximum temperatures reaching . There is a winter dry season (November–April) and a summer wet season (May–October).
Monywa received of rainfall on 19 Oct 2011. This was a new record for rainfall within 24 hours in October in Monywa for the last 47 years. The previous record was on 24 Oct 1967.
Transport.
Monywa is served by the Mandalay-Budalin branch railway line, but is best reached by bus as the road from Mandalay is in reasonably good shape. Monywa is linked by road to Budalin, Dabayin, Ye-U and Kin-U, and by rail to Sagaing and the Mandalay - Myitkyina line. River transport on the Chindwin has always been important as it is navigable for to Hkamti during the monsoon season, and most of the year to Homalin.
Economy.
Monywa is a major centre for trade and commerce and for agricultural produce from the surrounding Chindwin valley, especially beans, orange, pulses and jaggery (palm sugar). In addition, the local industry includes mills for the production of cotton, flour, noodles, and edible oils. Sausages from Alon called "wet udaunk" are quite popular, and Budalin longyi (sarong) is known for the strength of the fabric and its checked patterns. Monywa's rough cotton blankets are famous throughout Myanmar (with Monywa providing 80% of the country's blankets for a century), and some can even be found sewn up into knapsacks sold to unsuspecting tourists in Bangkok. Other regional crafts include bamboo and reed products, bullock carts and agricultural implements. The village of Kyaukka is well known for its lacquerware utensils for everyday use.
Black market goods from India, especially saris and bicycle parts, pass through Monywa on their way to other parts of Myanmar.
Attractions.
The major tourist attraction in Monywa is "Mohnyin Thambuddhei Paya", a Buddhist temple with a huge stupa resembling Indonesia's Borobudur. It dates from 1303, although it was reconstructed in 1939. It is said to contain over 500,000 images of Buddha. Close by is the Bodhi Tataung Laykyun Setkyar Standing Buddha statue, the second-tallest statue in the world, at a total of 129 metres (including pedestal). This is the focal point of a sprawling site filled with Buddha state, bodhi trees, and pagodas, established by the Bodhi Tataung sayadaw in the 1960s. It includes also a 95-metre long reclining Buddha statue. 
Another attraction is the Phowintaung cave complex across the Chindwin River, approximately west of Monywa.
Very few tourists visit Monywa as its facilities are limited.
Education.
The city is home to:
Politics.
The insurgent Burmese Communist Party (BCP) was centred in the Monywa area (west of the Chindwin River) for many years. Although the BCP is no longer active, the Myanmar military presence in Monywa remains heavy.

