Stephen Carter, Baron Carter of Barnes

Stephen Andrew Carter, Baron Carter of Barnes, CBE (born 12 February 1964), is a Scottish businessman and politician who served as the Minister for Communications, Technology and Broadcasting from 2008 to 2009, and was also the Downing Street Chief of Staff under Prime Minister Gordon Brown.
Biography.
Born in Scotland, Carter was educated at Currie High School, Edinburgh. From 1982-87 he studied a law degree at the University of Aberdeen, where he graduated with LLB Hons and was the student president in 1985-86. He completed the Harvard Business School's Advanced Management Program in 1997. He is currently the President/MD for Alcatel-Lucent in Europe Middle East & Africa.
Career.
After graduation from the University of Aberdeen, he joined the international advertising agency group J Walter Thompson UK, where he stayed for many years. The last 6 of which he was MD & CEO of their business in UK & Ireland. From 2000 - 2003, Carter served as the MD & COO of UK cable TV company , guiding the company to establish a leading position in the UK broadband market. The Group was required, given market conditions, to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, which required a complete restructuring of the UK & Ireland business, and the subsequent takeover of the business by a group of previous bondholders. 
He presided over the bankruptcy protection proceedings of NTL, which at the time had debts of £12bn. Carter left NTL at the end of 2002 as the Group was poised to exit Chapter 11, with a payoff of £1.7m in compensation, including a £600,000 bonus. The company resolved a class action lawsuit brought by shareholders by paying out $9 Million in compensation in late 2007.,
From 2003 - 2007, Carter served as the founding CEO of Ofcom, the then newly created UK Media Telecoms Competition and Sectoral Regulator. During this time the hallmarks of his term of office was the restructuring of the wholesale telecoms market, and the acceleration of the UK broadband market. In recognition of his services, he was awarded the CBE in the 2007 Honours list. After a brief period back in the private sector with the private advisory firm Brunswick, he returned to public life as Chief of Strategy for Prime Minister Gordon Brown, and then as Minister for Communications, Technology & Broadcasting, where he commissioned and wrote The Digital Britain Report, and the follow on Digital Economy Act 2010. 
Because Carter was not a Member of Parliament, it was necessary to appoint him to the House of Lords. As a result, he was created Baron Carter of Barnes, of Barnes in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames and was introduced in the Lords on 16 October 2008 by Lord Currie and Lord Puttnam. He served in the House of Lords on the front bench in his capacity as Minister.
Additionally he has served on the Board of a number of companies, including Travis Perkins PLC, Royal Mail PLC, 2Wire Inc, and is currently a Non Executive Director at Informa PLC, and Chairman of the Ashridge Business School.
In 2010 he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate in Laws LLD by his home university, Aberdeen.
In April 2010 Carter became Chief Marketing, Strategy & Communication Officer for Alcatel-Lucent.
Resignation.
Lord Carter announced on 11 June 2009 that he would be resigning from his ministerial post following the publication of his Digital Britain report.

