TSA Loose Change Act (H.R. 1095; 113th Congress)

The TSA Loose Change Act () is a bill that would force the Transportation Security Administration to give the money left behind by passengers at TSA checkpoints to private charities that provide travel-related services to the members of the U.S. military and their families. The bill passed the United States House of Representatives during the 113th United States Congress.
Background.
The TSA collected over $531,000 at airport checkpoints in 2012. It collected $487,000 at checkpoints in 2011. The TSA has not spent all of the money it collected in 2012. The TSA's yearly appropriated budget is over $7 billion. John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York was the airport to keep the most loose change in 2010, collecting $46,918.06. 
Provisions of the bill.
The TSA Loose Change Act would direct the Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security (Transportation Security Administration) to transfer annually, without further appropriation, unclaimed money recovered at airport security checkpoints to nonprofit organizations that operate multiple airport centers throughout the United States to provide a place of rest and recuperation for Armed Forces members and their families. The language of the bill does not specify a specific charity by name, but only the United Service Organizations meets the requirements.
The money is currently retained by the TSA for civil aviation security.
Congressional Budget Office report.
"This summary is based largely on the summary provided by the Congressional Budget Office, as ordered reported by the House Committee on Homeland Security on October 29, 2013. This is a public domain source." 
Under current law, the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has authority to retain and spend, without annual appropriation, unclaimed money left at security checkpoints by air passengers for activities related to aviation security. According to TSA, airline passengers have left behind about $500,000 at airport security checkpoints in each of the past two fiscal years. Based on historical spending patterns, CBO expects that TSA will spend unclaimed checkpoint money gradually over the next several years.
H.R. 1095 would amend current law to require TSA to transfer unclaimed funds to nonprofit organizations that provide certain travel-related assistance to military personnel and their families. Requiring the agency to transfer such amounts to a nonfederal entity would accelerate the pace of spending relative to current law. However, because of the modest amount of money involved, CBO does not expect this change would have a significant net impact on the budget in any given year. For purposes of this estimate, CBO assumes that the requirement to transfer funds would apply only to amounts collected after H.R. 1095 is enacted and that existing balances would remain available to TSA for aviation security.
H.R. 1095 contains no intergovernmental or private-sector mandates as defined in the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act.
Procedural history.
The TSA Loose Change Act was introduced on March 12, 2013 by Rep. Jeff Miller (R, FL-1). It was referred to the United States House Committee on Homeland Security and the United States House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Transportation Security. It was reported alongside House Report 113-274. On November 27, 2013, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor announced the H.R. 1095 would be considered on the House floor on December 3, 2013. The House voted on December 3, 2013 to pass the bill by a voice vote.
Debate and discussion.
In the debate prior to passage in the House, the bill received the support of both Republicans and Democrats. 
Jeff Miller, the bill's sponsor, said that "the TSA has been keeping the pennies, nickels, dimes, and quarters from your change purse to pay for their bloated bureaucracy" and raised the question of "If TSA representatives get to play ‘finders keepers’ with your hard-earned cash, what’s the incentive to try to get the loose change to its rightful owners?" 

